Faststore hooks: overview (#2255)
vtexdocs/dev-portal-content: docs/faststore/docs/developer-tools/hooks-overview.mdx

---
title: "FastStore hooks"
excerpt: "Guide for all FastStore hooks, including their types, use cases, and impact on your store customization."
---

> FastStore provides a collection of React hooks that give you direct access to built-in store features and state, so you can build customized storefronts faster. This guide covers all available hooks, their categories, implementation patterns, and impact on your store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FastStore provides React hooks that give you access to built-in store features and state management, so you can build customized storefronts faster. This guide covers all available hooks, their categories, implementation patterns, and impact on your store.
```

> FastStore hooks let you:

Author: ```suggestion
FastStore hooks follow [React's hooks](https://react.dev/reference/react/hooks) conventions let you:
```

> FastStore hooks are reusable React functions that provide access to FastStore's built-in features and state management. They follow React's hooks conventions and allow you to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FastStore hooks let you:
```

- **Access store state**: Retrieve and manage cart, session, and UI state.
- **Implement analytics**: Track user behavior with GA4-compatible events.

> - **Build interactive user interface (UI)**: Create carousels, modals, search interfaces, and more.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Build interactive user interface**: Create carousels, modals, search interfaces, and more.
```

- **Enhance accessibility**: Implement focus management, keyboard navigation, and ARIA attributes

> - **Optimize performance**: Lazy-load data, prefetch resources, and manage rendering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Access store state**: Retrieve and manage cart, session, and UI state.
- **Implement analytics**: Track user behavior with GA4-compatible events.
- **Build interactive user interface (UI)**: Create carousels, modals, search interfaces, and more.
- **Enhance accessibility**: Implement focus management, keyboard navigation, and ARIA attributes.
- **Optimize performance**: Lazy-load data, prefetch resources, and manage rendering.
```

| **State management** | Access global store state without needing additional state-management libraries. |

## Available hooks

FastStore hooks are organized into the following categories:

| Hook categories | Description |
| ---------- | ----------- |
| [UI and interaction hooks](#ui-and-interaction-hooks) | Available from the `@faststore/components` package. These hooks manage user interface state and interactions. |
| [Analytics hooks](#analytics-hooks) | Available from the `@faststore/core` package. These hooks enable tracking and analytics integration. |
| [Experimental hooks](#experimental-hooks-unstable) | Available from the `@faststore/core/experimental` package. These hooks provide advanced features but are suffixed with `_unstable` because they may change in future releases. |

### UI and interaction hooks

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `UIProvider` | Context provider that manages global UI state for cart sidebar, modals, navigation, filters, toasts, popovers, and region selection. | Wrap your application root to enable UI state management. Required by other UI hooks. |

> | `useUI` | Access global UI state and actions managed by UIProvider. | Control cart sidebar, modals, navigation menu, filters, toasts, popovers, and region selection from any component. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useUI` | Access global UI state and actions managed by `UIProvider`. | Control cart sidebar, modals, navigation menu, filters, toasts, popovers, and region selection from any component. |
```

> | `useSearch` | Manages search interface state within SearchProvider context. | Building custom search components, managing search input state, implementing search suggestions. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useSearch` | Manages search interface state within `SearchProvider` context. | Building custom search components, managing search input state, implementing search suggestions. |
```

| `useSlider` | Manages carousel/slider state including current page, navigation, and swipe gestures. | Creating product carousels, image galleries, testimonial sliders, or any multi-item navigation component. |
| `useSlideVisibility` | Determines visibility state for slider items based on current index. | Lazy-loading carousel images, applying visibility-based animations, optimizing render performance. |
| `useOnClickOutside` | Detects clicks outside a referenced element and triggers a callback. | Closing modals when clicking backdrop, dismissing dropdowns, hiding popovers on outside interaction. |
| `useTrapFocus` | Traps keyboard focus within a container element for accessibility. | Modal dialogs, slide-out panels, any overlay that should constrain focus for keyboard navigation. |
| `useScrollDirection` | Detects scroll direction (up/down) for responsive header behavior. | Hide/show sticky headers on scroll, trigger animations based on scroll direction, optimize mobile screen space. |
| `useFadeEffect` | Creates progressive fade-in effect based on scroll position or distance. | Subtle entrance animations, progressive content reveal, enhancing visual hierarchy. |

> | `useSKUMatrix` | Manages SKU/variant selection logic within SKUMatrixProvider context. | Building custom variant selectors, product configuration interfaces, size/color pickers. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useSKUMatrix` | Manages SKU/variant selection logic within `SKUMatrixProvider` context. | Building custom variant selectors, product configuration interfaces, size/color pickers. |
```

> | `useProductComparison` | Manages product comparison list within ProductComparisonProvider. | Product comparison features, "Compare" buttons on product cards, comparison page implementation. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useProductComparison` | Manages product comparison list within `ProductComparisonProvider`. | Product comparison features, "Compare" buttons on product cards, comparison page implementation. |
```

### Analytics hooks

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `usePageViewEvent` | Sends GA4 page view events automatically on route changes. | Track page navigation, monitor user journey, required for GA4 analytics dashboards. |

> | `useViewItemListEvent` | Sends GA4 product list impression events for PLP/search results. | Product listing pages, search results, category pages, recommendation carousels to track product impressions. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useViewItemListEvent` | Sends GA4 product list impression events for Product Listing Page (PLP)/search results. | Product listing pages, search results, category pages, recommendation carousels to track product impressions. |
```

| `useCheckoutButton_unstable` | Provides checkout button functionality with validation and navigation. | Cart page checkout buttons, mini-cart proceed to checkout, custom checkout flows. |
| `useRemoveButton_unstable` | Removes items from cart with analytics tracking. | Cart item removal, mini-cart management, order review pages. |

#### Delivery promise

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `deliveryPromiseStore_unstable` | Store for delivery promise data including pickup points and delivery options. | Accessing delivery data across components without prop drilling. |
| `useDeliveryPromise_unstable` | Access and manage delivery promise state, pickup points, and delivery options. | Shipping calculators, delivery date displays, pickup point selectors, store locators. |

#### GraphQL

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `useQuery_unstable` | Execute GraphQL queries with automatic caching and error handling. | Fetching product data, custom data requirements, extending FastStore API. |

> | `useLazyQuery_unstable` | Execute GraphQL queries on-demand (e.g., on button click). | Search suggestions on input, load-more pagination, conditional data fetching. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useLazyQuery_unstable` | Execute GraphQL queries on-demand (for example, on button click). | Search suggestions on input, load-more pagination, conditional data fetching. |
```

#### Newsletter

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `useNewsletter_unstable` | Newsletter subscription functionality. | Newsletter signup forms, email capture modals, footer subscription widgets. |

#### Product

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `useDiscountPercent_unstable` | Calculate discount percentage from price and list price. | Display discount badges, savings indicators, promotional information. |
| `useFormattedPrice_unstable` | Format price values according to current locale and currency. | Display prices consistently across the store with proper currency symbols and formatting. |
| `useLocalizedVariables_unstable` | Provides localized variables for queries based on current session. | Multi-locale stores, currency conversion, region-specific content. |
| `useProductQuery_unstable` | Fetch detailed product data by ID or slug. | Product detail pages, quick view modals, product preview cards. |

> | `useProductLink_unstable` | Generate SEO-friendly product URLs. | Product card links, navigation to PDPs, breadcrumbs. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `useProductLink_unstable` | Generate SEO-friendly product URLs. | Product card links, navigation to Product Detail Pages (PDPs), breadcrumbs. |
```

| `useSession_unstable` | Access current session data reactively. | Personalized content, currency display, shipping calculations, user-specific features. |
| `validateSession_unstable` | Validate and refresh session data. | Session management, token refresh flows, authentication state sync. |

#### Shipping

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `getShippingSimulation_unstable` | Get shipping simulation data (function, not a hook). | Server-side shipping calculations, initial page load data, static generation. |
| `useShippingSimulation_unstable` | Run shipping simulations client-side. | Shipping calculators, delivery estimate displays, cart shipping options, postal code input. |

#### UI

| Hook | Description | Use cases |
|------|-------------|-------------|
| `useScreenResize_unstable` | Detect screen size changes and breakpoints. | Responsive behavior, mobile/desktop switching, conditional rendering based on screen size. |

## Hook usage guidelines

Follow these guidelines to get the most out of FastStore hooks and keep your customizations stable and maintainable.

### Choose the right hook for each use case

> FastStore hooks are organized by responsibility. Picking the right package for the task makes your code easier to reason about and reduces the risk of unintended side effects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FastStore hooks are organized by responsibility. Choosing the appropriate package for the task simplifies your code and minimizes the risk of unintended side effects:
```

- **UI state**: Use `@faststore/components` hooks for interface interactions.
- **Business logic**: Use `@faststore/core/experimental` hooks for store features.
- **Analytics**: Use analytics hooks for tracking.
- **Data fetching**: Use GraphQL hooks for custom queries.

### Test experimental hooks before production

Experimental hooks (suffixed with `_unstable`) provide early access to new features but may change without notice. Before relying on them in production, take the following precautions:

- Test in a development environment first.
- Monitor for console warnings.
- Check the changelog for breaking changes.
- Have fallback behavior in place.

## Common use cases

The following examples show how to combine multiple hooks to build common storefront features.

### Building a custom buy button

This example builds a custom "Add to Cart" button that integrates with FastStore's cart and UI systems. It combines two hooks:

- `useBuyButton_unstable` — handles the cart logic and triggers GA4 analytics automatically when the item is added.

> - `useUI` — exposes UI actions such as `pushToast`, used here to display a confirmation message after the user clicks the button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `useBuyButton_unstable`: Handles the cart logic and triggers GA4 analytics automatically when the item is added.
- `useUI`: Exposes UI actions such as `pushToast`, used here to display a confirmation message after the user clicks the button.
```

function CustomBuyButton({ product, quantity = 1 }) {
  const { pushToast } = useUI()
  
  const cartItem = {
    itemOffered: product,
    quantity,
    price: product.offers.offers[0].price,
    listPrice: product.offers.offers[0].listPrice,
    seller: product.offers.offers[0].seller
  }
  
  const buyProps = useBuyButton(cartItem, true)
  
  const handleClick = (e) => {
    buyProps.onClick(e)
    pushToast({
      message: `${product.name} added to cart!`,
      status: 'INFO'
    })
  }
  
  return (
    <button {...buyProps} onClick={handleClick} className="custom-buy-button">
      Add {quantity} to Cart
    </button>
  )
}
```

### Creating an accessible search modal

This example creates a search modal that follows accessibility best practices (focus trapping, keyboard navigation, and dismiss-on-outside-click) while displaying search suggestions in real time. It combines four hooks:

- `useUI` — manages modal visibility and exposes the `closeModal` action.
- `useOnClickOutside` — closes the modal when the user clicks outside it.
- `useTrapFocus` — keeps keyboard focus inside the modal while it's open, an essential accessibility behavior for dialogs.

> - `useSuggestions_unstable` — fetches search term suggestions based on the current query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `useUI`: Manages modal visibility and exposes the `closeModal` action.
- `useOnClickOutside`: Closes the modal when the user clicks outside it.
- `useTrapFocus`: Keeps keyboard focus inside the modal while it's open, an essential accessibility behavior for dialogs.
- `useSuggestions_unstable`: Fetches search term suggestions based on the current query.
```

  const ref = useRef(null)
  const suggestions = useSuggestions({ query })
  
  useOnClickOutside(ref, closeModal)
  useTrapFocus(ref, { active: modal })
  
  if (!modal) return null
  
  return (
    <div role="dialog" aria-modal="true" aria-label="Search">
      <div ref={ref}>
        <input
          type="search"
          value={query}
          onChange={(e) => setQuery(e.target.value)}
          placeholder="Search products..."
          autoFocus
        />
        {suggestions.length > 0 && (
          <ul role="listbox">
            {suggestions.map(item => (
              <li key={item.id} role="option">{item.name}</li>
            ))}
          </ul>
        )}
      </div>
    </div>
  )
}
```

### Implementing a product carousel with analytics

This example builds a product carousel that tracks which products are visible to the shopper at any given moment, sending a GA4 `view_item_list` event whenever the visible set changes. It combines three hooks:

- `useSlider` — manages carousel state, navigation, and swipe gestures.
- `useSlideVisibility` — determines which items are currently visible, useful for lazy-loading and impression tracking.

> - `useViewItemListEvent` — sends the GA4 product impression event with the visible products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `useSlider`: Manages carousel state, navigation, and swipe gestures.
- `useSlideVisibility`: Determines which items are currently visible, useful for lazy-loading and impression tracking.
- `useViewItemListEvent`: Sends the GA4 product impression event with the visible products.
```

    
    if (visibleProducts.length > 0) {
      viewItemList({
        item_list_name: listName,
        items: visibleProducts.map((p, index) => ({
          item_id: p.id,
          item_name: p.name,
          index: sliderState.currentItem + index,
          price: p.price
        }))
      })
    }
  }, [sliderState.currentItem, products, listName])
  
  return (
    <div {...handlers} className="carousel">
      <button onClick={() => slide('previous')} aria-label="Previous products">
        ←
      </button>
      
      <div className="carousel-track">
        {products.map((product, i) => (
          <ProductCard
            key={product.id}
            product={product}
            visible={isVisible(i)}
          />
        ))}
      </div>
      
      <button onClick={() => slide('next')} aria-label="Next products">
        →
      </button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

### Building a shipping calculator

This example builds a shipping calculator that lets shoppers estimate delivery costs and times based on their postal code. It combines two hooks:

- `useShippingSimulation_unstable` — runs the shipping simulation client-side and returns available delivery options.

> - `useFormattedPrice_unstable` — formats prices according to the store's current locale and currency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `useShippingSimulation_unstable`: Runs the shipping simulation client-side and returns available delivery options.
- `useFormattedPrice_unstable`: Formats prices according to the store's current locale and currency.
```

  const formatPrice = useFormattedPrice
  
  const handleCalculate = () => {
    if (postalCode.length >= 5) {
      simulate({
        postalCode,
        items: items.map(item => ({
          id: item.id,
          quantity: item.quantity,
          seller: item.seller
        }))
      })
    }
  }
  
  return (
    <div className="shipping-calculator">
      <input
        type="text"
        value={postalCode}
        onChange={(e) => setPostalCode(e.target.value)}
        placeholder="Enter postal code"
        maxLength={9}
      />
      <button onClick={handleCalculate} disabled={loading}>
        {loading ? 'Calculating...' : 'Calculate Shipping'}
      </button>
      
      {error && <p className="error">Unable to calculate shipping</p>}
      
      {data?.logisticsInfo && (
        <div className="shipping-options">
          {data.logisticsInfo[0].slas.map(sla => (
            <div key={sla.id} className="shipping-option">
              <span>{sla.name}</span>
              <span>{formatPrice(sla.price)}</span>
              <span>{sla.shippingEstimate}</span>
            </div>
          ))}
        </div>
      )}
    </div>
  )
}
```

## Related guides

> - [Issues when using FastStore hooks](https://developers.vtex.com/docs/guides/issues-when-using-faststore-hooks)

Author: The link will work once we merge #2664
